roughly, which it is.
I just don't even think about it.
It's right there.
Thank you very much for agreeing to see us.
Briefly, I write a column that appears in about 25 newspapers, largely in university towns all over the country.
And my wife and I also are introducing a children's book review for a number of these newspapers and other newspapers, such as Orlando, which is
It doesn't take care.
What do we do when they are going to take a children's book review?
That's the Orlando Sentinel Times.
That's right.
They're going to start with our children's book.
I have to say, Connie does the heroic work on the children's books.
She goes through all of them.
She selects them from the checklist.
She makes the selections and writes up the initial reviews and then together we work on these.
Does that mean in fall you get about 100 books a week?
Reviews and new copies?
At least?
It's overwhelming, yeah.
Thank God she's in charge of that.
Do you have a little library nearby where you can send these things when you're done with them?
We have two.
We have some nice town public libraries in the area.
Do you live in Worcester?
We live in Grafton, which is a little town to the southeast of where the tough spec school is.
It's really very close.
It's about 45 minutes.
It's not off 146, is it?
At 146, it goes to the Millbury, and Millbury joins Rapids.
So it's very close to 146.
You're from Grand Rapids, Michigan.
That's right.
Grand Rapids is one of my newspapers.
Yeah, Grand Rapids Press.
Grand Rapids Press takes about two of our teachers a month.
So undoubtedly, they will be very, very pleased
I hope so.
Anyway, there are three major storylines here, which it seems to me are all fascinating.
We have the continuing phenomenal success of the Polar Express.
We have Jumanji into the film, which is a 32-page book, which you did about
a dozen years or so ago?
Yes, I think about 12 years.
And how that became a motion picture, a 32-page book, which is expanded.
I'm certainly interested in your insights into that.
And now, of course, this collaboration, a second collaboration with Mark Belker, which is a departure for you because you write your stories.
Right, exactly.
And you worked with Mark before on a classic
And this is a created story, so it's, I guess... Right, using the same characters.
Using the same characters.
So... I think Mark... Well, I think Mark conceived these as a trilogy.
So the Swan Lake story... For the Swan Lake story, he invented characters whose story wasn't completed with the end of Swan Lake.
Do you want to get that?
I think...
Okay, we're back on again.
So Mark was interested enough in these characters and their story to wonder as a writer what happened to them next, which is always a good starting point, I think, for someone who
wants to tell a story, so he told one, and that's The City in Winter.
A City in Winter.
I'm actually halfway done with a third, which is called The Veil of Snow.
And when you project publication on that?
A year from now.
Now, the first collaboration was about, I would say, is it ten years?
Oh, no, no, I don't think so.
Ten years, it's at least a half years.
Oh, actually, I was working on that book.
when I moved into this house, which was seven and a half years ago.
So it would have been published seven years ago, I guess.
And how do you feel about having somebody else's story as a subject?
Well, it doesn't... It provides certain challenges, obviously, and it results in a different kind of picture-making than I would make for my own work.
And that's because the content isn't something that I would... It's not something that would come to me as a writer or a storyteller.
These are all costume pieces.
They take place in some ambiguous sort of 18th, 17th, 16th century place.
And those aren't the kinds of...
environments where my imagination goes when I think about stories.
I'm not exactly sure why.
So anyway, the result is that I get these manuscripts, these texts that Mark produces, and I am forced to draw a kind of picture that I might not draw otherwise if I was just working from my own stories.
So that's a challenge, but also it's a learning experience for me.
Well, I am and I'm not.
I mean, you know, as a storyteller, one of the things that I think happens when I sit down and think about a story, I think about it very visually, and I think that my impulses as a storyteller are slightly shaped by my desires as a visual artist.
And what that means is that when I think of stories, I think
by nature, I think of stories that have intriguing visual premises.
You know, a train that stops in front of the house, or jungle animals inside a home, a little house that floats around the world, flying sailboats.
I mean, these are all images that have appeared in my books, and while I
It's not the case that the image literally comes first, though it's kind of like that, I suppose.
I think that when I start thinking about stories, I start thinking about things that have, to put it in the really kind of crass way, a visual hook, something that has a kind of an image in it that's compelling.
And I'm certain that Mark doesn't do that, though his books are filled with opportunities to create successful or at least compelling illustrations.
Well, it's happened in a variety of ways.
So I've written enough books so that it's not perhaps possible for me to characterize it, but to at least to describe the process as it's happened in different ways.
And sometimes it's truly the...
The Impulse is simply a storytelling one, which I guess I could describe as being struck by ideas rather than images, and it's the ideas that sort of drives my artistic effort.
But in the case of the Wreck of the Zephyr, which has flying boats in it, I was doodling around, and I just drew a picture of a little sailboat, an old gaff-rigged sloop,
and it was flying in front of a lighthouse.
This was not drawn for any reason.
It was, I guess you'd call it idle doodling, sketching.
So the idea was provocative to me, and a little bit after that I was asked to do a cover for a cricket magazine, which is a magazine for kids, and I thought, well, they didn't say what it had to be.
They had no guidelines for it.
I did a more refined image, a more refined drawing of this image.
And at that point, I decided this was intriguing, this idea of a boat that could sail.
And so I pursued that as a story idea.
From that point on, I wasn't really trying to find in my storytelling opportunities to draw lots of pictures of sailing boats.
At that point, I discarded, or didn't discard,
wasn't completely focused on the image, but it was, in fact, the image that stimulated the first storytelling impulses.
And my storytelling impulse manifests itself as an interrogation of myself.
I interrogate myself.
And the interrogation is fairly simple, like, why does the boat fly?
Where is it going?
You know, who's
Who's holding the tiller?
How long will it stay up?
How high can it go?
And that's always sort of been the case with my storytelling, is that I just ask questions, and answering the question, the story takes me the step forward.
Is it an exciting process for you when the story begins to develop?
Well, it is and it isn't.
I've started out on...
in the process of interrogation and not gotten any answers.
Are there books that sit on the desk floor?
It may not be that there weren't any answers.
It may have been that I couldn't ask the right questions, but the original premise was not fruitful.
I couldn't find good questions to ask about the idea.
So when we think of being fruitful, and I think it's important also that you became a very prominent children's book,
author-illustrator prior to having children of your own, and reading, I guess, I'm thinking in terms of the audience, and also as a concomitant of this, the enduring and increasing and phenomenal popularity of Polar Express.
This is a book that's brought by mediums of adults.
You know, that's the primary target, I guess, not target.
Well, I had no target.
You know, the target of my efforts is to satisfy myself.
Okay.
The fact that I was childless during a period of time when I probably wrote a dozen books that were, you know, I guess, conventionally considered books for children.
I wasn't writing them for children anyway, so it wasn't important that there were no children in my house.
I only... Yeah, well, I was... I always...
Everything I've made as an artist I've really made for myself.
Like this thing right here, this obelisk in a strong wind.
And there's a few other pieces.
There's the sinking Titanic over there.
These are all sculptures I made, and I never asked myself, who am I making this for?
And what should it look like because of what that audience might or might not want?
I always made the art for myself.
I thought of it as, what would I like to put in my living room?
A little sculpture of the Titanic and Browns would be fine.
So that's why I made it.
I was making it for myself.
In the same way, when I was seven or eight years old and I made model cars and model boats, I never wondered who it was for.
It was for me.
You know, I mean, I wanted to build that little car and I wanted to put it on my bookshelf when I was done.
And I think that feeling was intact when I got to be...
when I got to college and I was making things, it was the same spirit.
I don't know if it's... I suppose in some ways you could say it sounds selfish that I was only making it for myself, and I wasn't thinking about an audience, but I never did.
And because I made sculpture for so long, which is not, I don't think, a popular art form, it probably wouldn't surprise people to learn that a sculptor never thought about his audience, because many sculptors have no audience anyway.
I think they think about it.
But it might strike people as perhaps self-centered or arrogant for someone in a popular art form, which is really dependent on the dissemination of the art form to a group in a culture.
It might seem arrogant to not wonder or care what they think.
I don't think it's a question of caring, but I think it's certainly a question of wondering.
You certainly have reached both audiences, and that is quite remarkable, I think.
But it's just never been part of the sort of thoughts that go through my mind when I start working to wonder whether or not this idea will interest children or adults, boys or girls.
I just sit down and try to hold my own attention
make something that I really like.
How has it been that you came to be certainly identified as a children's book author illustrated?
How did that happen?
Well, you know, I make, because the books that I make are picture books, and picture books are always for kids.
I mean, that's just the way they, that's just the way it's defined.
If you said, what's a children's book?
Someone would say, well, a children's book is a book with a few, not a lot of words and lots of pictures.
So if that's the way you define a children's book, then if you make something with not many words and a lot of pictures, then by definition it's a children's book.
Do you agree with that?
Well, I do, because it happens to be a way to tell stories that's engaging to children and children enjoy.
But I don't really think of it as a children's book when I sit down and start working.
And really, the first time I did a book, I thought of it as an art form.
not with a particular audience.
It was not meant for a particular audience, just an art form, and the art form happened to be actually quite a nice little thing.
It was essentially a portfolio of drawings that were connected by a narrative that were sewn together on one edge and enclosed within two pieces of cardboard.
Well, that happens to also be a book, but I saw it as
I saw it as just this kind of art form.
You know, the same way, you know, I don't know, a theater, writing a play is an art form.
So putting a series of drawings narratively connected with the narrative between two pieces of cardboard, well printed, struck me as an art form.
Now, you get into this, you work first, and you remain,
an artist, a sculptor, doing... Well, I haven't made sculpture for a long time, so I can't lay claim to that as part of my identity anymore.
Anymore, but I think when you start... I've read someplace that it was actually proposed to you, suggested that you should make some of your pictures.
I think David McCullough and your wife, perhaps.
Exactly.
I was making sculpture and I was doing drawings at night for my own amusement.
My sculpture studio was quite a ways from my house.
So rather than travel back there after dinner, I would just go to a little room I'd set aside in my apartment where I had a drawing table and I'd just draw pictures.
So I thought of it as my hobby.
Those pictures were quite narrative.
By that I mean they had images that effectively stimulated the sculpture.
question and answer process I've already described.
The pictures I drew, I can't say it was through calculation or intention, but the things I liked to draw, the drawings were a little mysterious.
There was something unexplained in the drawing.
And I didn't always know what was explained or unexplained, but the effect of looking at the picture was to stimulate this
question, like, why are those people doing that, or why is that figure doing that?
So those were the drawings I was making, and also partly because of the style.
They were representational, and I guess in some ways they had very sort of specific qualities that are appropriate for
I had the ability to draw the figure and things like that.
I was encouraged by my wife, who was teaching school then, and using picture books in her classroom, and also by David McCauley, who was actually a friend of my wife's, who saw the drawings,
show these to some publishers, which is what happened.
I was encouraged by the few different editors that I spoke with, and so I just decided, well, I may as well give it a try.
The odd thing is that the three or four publishers, I only met with a couple of them, but my wife was actually working as my representative and taking my little portfolio around.
A lot of these editors all suggested that I think about writing a story, and I think that's such a strange thing to... I think it's strange for an editor to make an assumption that a person who draws an interesting picture might have an interesting story to tell as well.
But they all perhaps not made the assumption, but at least had those words of encouragement or advice.
I'm not exactly sure, but certainly the idea had never occurred to me before they suggested it, that I not only be a picture maker, but a storyteller.
But having accepted this advice and considered storytelling, and then actually telling the story, that made my appreciation of the picture book as an art form more
more pronounced, because now I was the text maker and the picture maker, and I suppose if I could also print the things, then I could really print and bind them.
As an artist, and I do believe that your paintings are large.
Things are about twice as big, sometimes a little bit bigger than that from the original, so something this big is this big.
Are you thinking, are you executing with
Are you mindful of the fact of the format?
Well, I am.
My understanding of reproduction has been enhanced over the years, and the fact is that there are certain things that you can do that look good on a piece of paper that don't reproduce well.
So there are kind of, I don't know if you'd call them compromises, but there are at least...
maybe little concessions you have to make to the limitations of printing.
I would imagine that is particularly pertinent when dealing with somebody else's text, because you can certainly adapt the text, if it's your own, to your art.
Here you give a manuscript, and you have to visualize from his creative process, I guess.
Well, you know, it's difficult for me to...
to understand exactly, to literally feel what goes through people's minds when they read.
When I read, and it may be just because I grew up with television and films, but I definitely think the reader of the late 20th century, no matter how kind of spare and perhaps nondescriptive a text is, still has a tendency to see it acted out, to see it in their mind's eye.
And they may not have done that 100 years ago because
They didn't associate storytelling with this complete visual stimulus, which happens when the story's on TV or on film.
But when I read a book now, even when I was a child, I always saw what was taking place.
In the absence of description, I would imagine a character with a particular kind of face.
Have you talked to Mark at all?
Are these characters, are they close to the way he sees them in his mind?
He hasn't told me that they are or aren't.
They probably aren't.
Do you see it as a synergistic exercise, or is it two separate exercises?
I see it as two separate exercises that make another thing when they sort of come together.
I still think that because these aren't picture books, which all my other work is, the text is still the dominant element in these books.
There's 130 pages in City and Winter, and
And there's 13 images, I think, and 13 illustrations.
So there's 10 pages of text and then a picture.
And that kind of relationship is nothing like the kind of feeling you get when you're in a picture book where there's picture text, picture text, and it's all mine.
But so much of the story and the feeling of the story is being carried along by the picture making.
And there are so many pictures that you can actually start to just leave out a lot of text
that you might use if the pictures weren't there.
Because you don't have to describe things, because it's a picture of it, so why put it in there?
I have to think that in an exercise like this, it's essential to leave your ego in the studio.
Well, it is.
The challenge with doing marks things, as I said, as a picture book artist, if I make a picture that's very descriptive, and I've also used some of that same language to describe that space or place in the text,
then I'll eliminate it from the text because it doesn't make any sense to read about, you know, a snowfall, et cetera, et cetera, et cetera, et cetera.
I mean, you might want to create a feeling of motion or specific feeling for the environment, but you wouldn't make a long list of all the details in the picture because the picture's there.
So why slow the story down?
So Mark has precise and stimulating description of lots of spaces.
And in some respects, you could say, well, the author's spent so much time describing this space, this place, why isn't there a picture of that?
Well, that's why I don't, that's why I'm disinclined to put those things in there, because the text already has it.
And in some ways, in some ways, I also think that if something is fairly well described, then the reader always starts to work on it, gets put together in their own imagination.
and then putting a picture in it, a picture of it, might actually limit their imagination in some way.
So there are things in there that I think a cursory reading might suggest, well, this looks like a good thing for it, a good place for an illustration, that I, to some minds, might perversely be ignoring, but not really ignoring because I just think, well, the text can do that.
And he doesn't suggest areas that you might want to take a look at in the illustration.
You just find the ones that are most resonant for yourself.
Yeah, well, you know, I found in the second one that I did a lot of... I was fairly close.
There were a lot of figures in it.
I'm fairly tight on the figures because I think seeing figures at particular times in the story...
kind of superficially makes the story alive, but just seeing the fortunes of the protagonists and seeing the particular moments in the story seemed to be a good way to illustrate a sitting limit.
I'm using a slightly different tactic in this third one and used a little different tactic in the first one.
You mentioned earlier that when you started the pictures at home with an exercise in the evening, that there was always
there appears to be an occurring element of mystery, an unresolved nature.
Excuse me.
Where are you going, Lance?
Okay.
I tend to find that quality evident in the books, actually.
It does seem to be if there's something as consistent as it is, an unresolved aspect.
Yeah.
Maybe I'm wrong about that.
No, no.
The first book that I wrote, once again, without knowing myself so well or having the sort of wherewithal to be calculating and say, this is the kind of book I want to do, and then do that kind of book, I just wrote the first story, which is The Garden of Abdul-Gazazi.
And I found when I got to the end that I'd written this thing that was very satisfying to me.
And one of the things that was satisfying to me was that there was a miraculous event, and there was a way to explain the miracle in a simple prosaic way, and there was another way, which was that it was an act of true magic.
And I liked the idea of opposing those two things, that there's a simple explanation for why this happened, and there is a phenomenal explanation
explanation for why it happened.
And so that was the mystery, and that's sort of the tension at the end of the book.
And it's interesting for kids, I think, to experience that because they have to contend with those ideas in themselves.
And, you know, it's funny to see the response to that book because the way children will explain
the resolution of the book, or how they will resolve it for themselves, changes a little bit as they age.
When they're younger, they think it's phenomenal.
It's a phenomena.
It's supernatural.
But as they get older, then they just realize that it wasn't supernatural, but it was a trick.
Do you see a lot of these as tricks?
I mean, I know you've described your craft as being, your art, as being a magician in some instances.
Well, um...
In the simplest way, the idea of illusion and trying to make a real space inside a two-dimensional page, I think it's kind of like a magician.
But it's pretty easy.
You can make boats fly pretty easily on paper.
I don't know if that's magic or not.
Well, you certainly saw another dimension when they made a film out of one of the books.
Maybe you could describe a little what that was like.
for you, as the creator of this story, to see it.
Yeah.
It was a 32-page book.
It was a 32-page book, and what the studio was really interested in was what I've already described as a visual premise.
The visual premise simply being Jungle Animals in the House.
And when that premise struck me as a picture book artist, I said, well, that's an interesting picture.
the idea of monkeys standing in a kitchen.
There's something kind of surrealistic, but there's also something a little menacing about it.
So I started wondering to myself, at that point, how the monkeys got in the kitchen.
And I came up with the idea with a game board.
And all these considerations about how to,
as a writer interested in plot, trying to find a plot that would account for this, an interesting plot that would account for this, and also bring other benefits to the story, which is the kind of magical way that the animals actually got there and the kind of loss of control that the children would suffer by having opened up what is a mouse to a kind of a Pandora's box, which is a game box.
And then also being mindful, not while I'm writing, but always when I'm done, about the meaning of what I've written.
I mean, it's possible to sit down and write a story without ever considering a moral premise, which I never do.
Never do.
And then... Well, Mark...
Sorry, they're filled with moral premises.
But in my own work, and basically as an artist, I think that having a moral premise or having before you write the desire to teach a lesson and then trying to create a story that teaches that lesson, that's more like propaganda than it is writing.
It's more...
I think you get a more kind of, in some ways, persuasive and compelling piece of art if you simply write and unbeknownst to yourself, unintentionally reveal your own values through writing the story and discover once you've written it that there is a moral premise.
I mean, the whole idea of writing is that the artist should in some ways expose himself to himself
and also expose himself to his readers.
So I sat down and wrote the story about the jungle animals and finished off the story in a way that seemed natural to me and seeing where the story was heading.
And then when I got done with the story, I realized that it's basically just a cautionary tale.
It's about reading the instructions before you start out on something.
Don't start something without the intention of finishing it.
because there's a point in the story where the kids form that determination, not to depend on their parents, but to finish it themselves.
Now, if I had in mind to write a story about starting something you finish, I never would have come up with the idea of the jungle animals.
But the jungle animals was, I thought I was writing a story about jungle animals in the kitchen, but it turns out the story is really a little bit about taking responsibility for your choices.
So that was what happened in the book.
So when I met with the filmmakers, and we discussed this, that you can't simply exploit the book for this visual idea and not also have a story that has an emotional feeling.
It's based more on how we feel about the characters and the change they go through.
And that would embody, obviously, any moral premises that were in the story.
So we sat around, we talked about it,
And we all agreed that the slight moral premise, which is to finish what you've completed, probably wouldn't be enough to sustain a novel and feature-length film.
Yeah, feature-length film.
So we talked about some ideas and then different plot things that could be added.
And they produced a script which...
the studio wasn't happy with, and I wasn't happy with either, which seemed to be doing exactly what I cautioned them they should not do, which is just to simply exploit the visual premise and not worry enough about a character-driven story.
These ideas about character-driven stories are practically cliches in Hollywood storytelling meetings.
Everybody talks about it, but nobody's quite sure how to do it, especially when it's got, you know, when it's laden with all these effects, special effects.
Anyway, they finally got close to what they thought was a character story at some point, but everyone was still unhappy with the script.
And at that point, I offered to prepare a script, which I did.
And it was that script that they had which induced them to greenlight the project, which means that they were ready to start pricing it.
And then they got a director based on the script that I had produced.
And then the director got...
some rewrite people involved.
And unfortunately, the rewrite people, I think, went back to exploiting the action and caring less about the character.
And, you know, they created an exciting film, but in some ways it was more like an amusement park ride than a film.
I mean, I thought it was successful on a lot of levels, but the thing that I thought most appealing in the story that I created was this
was this wistful sense of loss that a person would have when they lost their parents in 20 years of their life, which is what happens to the Robin Williams character.
And while what you might call the story beats weren't so different in the script I'd prepared, weren't so different from mine from what ended up on screen, this whole feeling of his wistful longing for his past was vanished, and that was the story
That was the character story I was trying to get onto the screen.
Did you talk to Rodman at all?
No, no.
Once a director is involved, it's verboten for others to suppress their ideas.
Of course, but it's interesting, coincidentally, I interviewed Oliver Sacks, who would have seen himself play by Rodman.
In that instance, of course, Rodman spent all kinds of time with Sacks, just picking up the mannerisms and the
and to try and use that in his characterization, but this would be an entirely different kind of a thing.
Oh yeah, well I'm no expert on what it would mean to be trapped in a jungle for 20 years, and then release Jack Deere.
But there's a fear of the story, though.
Well, of that part of the film story, you know, I have these own powerful feelings when I go back to my hometown, which hasn't changed for the worse the way it had in the Jumanji film story,
There's something about revisiting your childhood home that gives you this intense feeling of loss.
You haven't literally lost anything, except that you realize how quickly you've lost a large part of your life.
And why is it that we get that exact sense in the polar express?
Well, because that has to do with something else that people lose as they get older, which is the ability to believe in something that's, you know, a fantasy, but
Do you think that in a way that explains the unbelievable popularity and success and resonance of that book?
I've never seen anything like it in publishing.
Well, you know, it's funny.
People, the sort of underlying theme of every Christmas present is the Christmas past.
And I think when Christmas comes, there's always this feeling of kind of nostalgia and melancholy.
when you're literally enjoying the Christmas that's happening that year, but in a melancholy way, you're reflecting on those of the past.
And it's melancholy because it often includes, it can include memories of Christmases spent with people who are no longer alive.
It can include memories of Christmases that you experienced as a child when the world seemed so miraculous that a guy could fly around in a sleigh, and you realize that that person who was you is dead too.
because you can't believe that anymore.
I think Christmas for even people who are least burdened by the kind of melancholy that attends holidays, I think everyone feels it a little bit.
If you could, talk to me just a bit about the image that came there, that produced that book.
Well, The Waiting Train.
The Train.
And then... Exactly.
Now, that was a... You know, I like that story to be preserved for children as autobiographical.
Rather than made up.
I don't want them to believe.
Not that it didn't believe.
To me, I don't know if you... I wrote an introduction for it in the 10th anniversary where I told...
Yeah, I revealed to my readers where the story came from.
Which is also presented autobiographically as an event that happened to me when I was younger, not so young, but stimulated me the ideas for the story.
When I first interviewed, you had a sign
a Swan Lake poster and a Polar Express poster.
The Swan Lake poster was in our older daughter's room, and our younger daughter has been the Polar Express.
I used to drive the girls to school every morning with a plate of tape.
We all know it quite hard.
It's just that.
It makes a dance, brings tears to the eyes of adults, as well as
Right.
Well, that's because, you know, for adults, the sense of loss that Christmas brings to mind is much keener than it is for children.
They don't know that it's going to be so much different as they age.
You know, no other holiday is so kind of like defined by your experience of the holiday is so defined by what age you are when you experience it.
I mean,
maybe a little bit the Easter Bunny coming, but you know, when you're a child, it's completely magical, and then when you're 10 or 11, well, maybe earlier than that, you become an agnostic, and then you're 10th or 11th when you really discard it, and you figure out your parents have conned you for all this period of time, and then you get to be a parent, and you have a little kid again, and you re-experience it kind of vicariously through your children, and you remember what it was like for you.
So the holiday has a completely different sort of feeling, as you will, at different ages.
To switch, if you don't mind my switching around and around, I'm trying to come along with the territory here.
What you've done with Mark here, and this is your second collaboration, is a throwback almost to 100 years when you had illustrators working with people like Mark Twain, Charles Dickens, and you have none of that today.
And it is kind of a throwback.
You're right, there aren't many.
Even the chapter books that are today for kids don't have many pictures in them.
So it is kind of an anachronism in one way, isn't it?
That we have this collaboration.
I guess I'm driving to a point.
I'm writing a book that will consider books and libraries of the future and where this is all going.
I have to believe that you have some thoughts on this as a person who sees the books
sell in the hundreds of thousands, and when people tell us that children aren't going to read books anymore, and yet fully 20-25% of the trade books sold today are children's type.
I wonder if you have any thoughts on this?
Well, insofar as the challenge presented to the traditional book bound between cardboard printed on paper posed by C. D. Rahn,
I don't think it's a terribly serious challenge.
I don't think it means the demise of the book.
Unless they can make display screens that are as small as a book and can produce the art with as good a fidelity and don't require any power to operate them.
I was talking with a friend once, we were talking about the CD-ROM and how you can access it and everything, and how much information it can hold.
And then it occurred to me, think about a way that you could carry around information and images that only weighed less than your laptop, cost a fraction of it, didn't require any electricity,
you could instantly access any part of it you wanted.
And I just thought, well, that's a book.
That's what you come up with.
And you can go as fast as you want.
You can go as slow as you want.
You can access any point of it.
There's also the physicality of it.
I can't, I mean, the only thing I could imagine in some kind of sort of science fiction consideration of a future where
where the economics would be so clear that a parent could go out and buy a CD-ROM with 2,000 children's books on it for their kid, and the cost of paper, because all the floors had been cut down, was so high that you'd have to pay like 10 times more for a book printed on paper than a CD-ROM with 2,000 books on it.
Well, then the book might become so rare, there's so little support for it in publishing, that they would print fewer and fewer, the cost would go higher and higher,
And having a book printed on paper would be some very special treasure.
And at that point it would be so spectacular that actually experience it through CD-ROM or on paper, paper would be the desirable thing because it would be rare and precious.
There's a CD-ROM with a Polar Express.
And it takes a few of them.
And how do you respond to them?
Well, they're all right.
I think that CD-ROMs can be very effective ways of telling stories, and they can be very effective ways of
stimulating the imagination of kids, and I think they can teach.
Their interactivity can create a compelling experience that's difficult to challenge with a simple book.
But I think just taking a book and putting it on a CD-ROM takes so little advantage of the technology that it almost seems like an inappropriate application.
I guess they call it
reapplication or reuse.
So there's a terminology for just picking up the book and sticking it on CD-ROM with no interactivity or anything like that.
Well, you've got all this computing power and all this storage capacity, and basically all you're doing is putting a paper book on the CD-ROM.
That doesn't make much sense to me.
And I just, I really did enjoy your book about Jack Frost in 1986.
That was kind of a, again... It's a riddle.
It's a riddle.
It's funny, you know, when I go down south, when I go down south and sign books down there, they all want to know who were the strangers.
When I go to California, they all want to know who were the strangers.
The kids out there don't know.
I didn't know that it was such a regional...
It's a piece of folklore, but it's pretty much the northern climates with the broadleaf forests that know about jackpot.
I've been asked down south if it's the personification of a deer, if it's Jesus.
They have all sorts of different explanations, and it must strike them as a truly riddling story.
Do you hear from children?
I would say the most common kind of mail I get is the body of mail that wants me to explain the mysteries that are in the book.
Like in the first book, they want to know how the boy's hat got in the garden.
They want to know if there really was somebody named Harris Burdick.
Most of them want me to come clean.
What do you do?
I don't.
I never do.
Do you ask them for letters?
Oh, yeah.
I send back, you know, a little bookmark or a form letter.
I'm assuming I'll put that in publication.
My mail volume is up.
You must get thousands or thousands of letters.
I do.
So I've got a little bookmark and a form letter and a picture and stuff like that that goes back.
But, you know, sometimes if it's a personal note from a kid where I can see the kids really
puzzle this out and written a letter, I'll do a little handwritten thing.
But then you also must get letters that kind of as class projects, too.
It's a penmanship project for the class.
But sometimes those are amusing, too.
I just got a big parcel of letters and I could tell that it was something close to that.
The teacher probably read three or four books.
And all the kids praised them.
And I could see that there was a non-conformist in the group because he attacked my work.
I was about seven years old and told me he hated it.
Well, it was so unrelenting and what you might say, kind of unenlightened criticism.
I think that he was doing it to give himself a sense of empowerment and control that he didn't have to write what the teacher said.
If you could briefly just tell us about some of these things in this world of wonderful work.
That was a model, actually, in the Wretched Stone.
That's the boat that the men sailed on.
It turned into apes.
I got that at an auction some years ago.
That building in the case there is a model of the building that I made.
I saw pictures when I was probably around 18 or 19 of the Flatiron Building.
seen from the prowl, the leading edge.
And it was so amusing to me because the optical illusion is that the building's only that wide.
And then when you see that it's actually triangular.
It makes much more sense.
The picture's not quite as absurd, even though I think the building is on some levels kind of absurd anyway, but I thought it would be interesting to have the truly flat iron building, so that's what that is.
And that's Obelisk and a Strong Wind, which is a sculpture of rosewood.
These, I've got a few of these.
These are steam-powered.
This is a little steamroller.
I've got a traction, a couple of traction of them.
Those also came from auctions.
Do you collect things, obviously?
Well, I don't have enough of these to call them a collection, but I... You like things?
I like things.
I like gizmos.
You know, little mechanical things.
Did you use some kind of a test stone to interact with them with all this stuff?
Well, I've got some wind-up toys upstairs that are all tiles.
They're Shuko and Marklin.
And, you know, I loved them when I was a boy, you know, and I guess I feel lucky to be able to indulge myself now.
So, are there still a lot of kids in you?
No, no, I think I'm too...
I worry too much to be able to lay claim to the image.
Oh, I guess some children worry.
But you did a book with one of your kids.
Sophia was in a book, and she was the inspiration for the book because I went downstairs once, and she was working on this coloring book, and it was the princess.
What's the princess's name?
Peter Pan?
It's not Princess Summer, Spring, Winterfall, is it?
That's Howdy Doody.
That's Howdy Doody, yeah.
Well, it was the princess, the Indian princess, and she was in the pool of water waiting for Peter Pan.
And Sophia had gone like this.
And the princess had this alarmed look on her face.
And after Sophia had covered it, it looked like her expression was a response to what Sophia had done with the crayons.
You know, because she was like this, and there were crayon marks all over her face, and it was like that's why she was doing it.
So that made me consider...
what life would be like in a coloring book and have to be finally the victim of being colored.
So Sophia was the color, although she's only in the very last page seen from the back.
Do you see, and I don't want to take up too much of your time, do you see it as a body of work, the whole corpus of your books,
As you're looking at your evaluation of the arc of your career, if you do think about that.
Oh yeah, I think all artists think of their... Unless they've undergone some kind of personality transforming event at some point in their life, then I think that they think of their work as all, in some ways, all one thing.
I'm always mindful of what I've done when I start because I'm sensitive to self-imitation.
I don't want to do something I've done before.
It's probably just a matter of the kind of values I have as an artist, but it grows kind of naturally out of a higher level of interest that I have in my work when I'm doing something I haven't done yet.
even if it's just working in kinds of materials I haven't done or telling a story that comes from a slightly different angle or something like that.
Or, you know, in the case of A City in Winter, it's much more than I ordinarily do, just as a way to see if pictures of figures alone advance the story well.
You didn't call or express, I guess, you were in your 30s, probably, when you did that.
Yeah.
Is that a book that
I don't know.
I guess I'm asking, is each one of these efforts reflective of where you are at this point in your life and in your career?
Oh yeah, I would hope so.
I mean, you know, an artist's effort should ideally
represent all the kind of ingredients that are in there, and that can be, you know, long-term, lifelong personality issues of the artist, but it can also mean more immediate sort of exogenous things, you know, changes in their life at that point, at that time.
Do you still divide your time kind of equally between your sculpture and your art and your book work or anything?
Yeah, yeah, I haven't made sculpture for a while, but I still do other kinds of pictures that don't go into books and posters, and I don't do a lot of that.
I have the opportunity now, it seems perhaps, to take advantage of the success of Jumanji, which actually grossed a lot of money for the studio.
Hundreds of millions of dollars
I'm not a gross writer in this undertaking, unfortunately.
But the success of Jumanji has created opportunities for me maybe to get involved in other films.
And that might provide... Any books that you've already done?
Yes, in fact.
Well, one studio is interested in one of the titles.
which I think actually has a lot of potential, or seems to have more potential than Jumanji.
Which one might it be?
It's the widow's broom, the story of the broom that can no longer fly, but can still manage to do little things around the house.
And there's talk of making the feature live film.
Live action, yes.
You know, I mean, the amazing thing about films today is that...
You literally can't imagine something that you can't put on film.
It doesn't have to be animation and stuff.
No, that's all I'm saying.
You could do a story about a dancing broom that can play the piano and feed the chickens, and it doesn't have to be animation.
It can be a live broom.
Did you have any questions over there?
I'm just thinking of a David McCall and question.
This is Ann, who's a year and... Well, in that picture, she's probably four months, but she's a year and a half now.
And this is Sophia, who's...